<!-- title: Three Rules for Project Selection -->

Today I ran across a thought provoking [article][article1] on Dr. Dobbs. The
thesis is that there is a perception that Open Source projects copies what
already existis and it's in Closed Source where the real innovation occurs. This
perception exists in part because how geeks choose what to work on.

There is most definitely evidence to the contrary and also to support that
perception, but the main point of the article is that there is a fundamental
problem in Open Source which manifests itself as this perception. The problem is
with project selection.

Now, Dijkstra wrote [a memo][article2] in 1982 that describes 3 steps to use
when selecting a topic for your research. These rules translate really well to
hacking and all geeks should consider them when selecting an Open Source project
to work on. The rules are:

1. Raise your quality standards as high as you can live with, avoid wasting your
   time on routine problems, and always try to work as closely as possible at
   the boundary of your abilities. Do this, because it is the only way of
   discovering how that boundary should be moved forward.
2. We all like our work to be socially relevant and scientifically sound. If we
   can find a topic satisfying both desires, we are lucky; if the two targets
   are in conflict with each other, let the requirement of scientific soundness
   prevail.
3. Never tackle a problem of which you can be pretty sure that (now or in the
   near future) it will be tackled by others who are, in relation to that
   problem, at least as competent and well-equipped as you.

Let's break this down a little so it can be easily digested.

Rule 1 is an internal one and it tells us that the obviously possible should be
shunned as well as the obviously impossible: the first would not be instructive,
the second would be hopeless, and both in their own way are barren.

Next, Dijkstra was refering to scientific projects, but Rule 2 can be easily
mapped to software projects also.

Rule 3 is the most important from an Open Source perspective. It ensures that
your contributions are unique and move the-state-of-the-art forward. As Dijkstra
so eloquently puts "If others will come up with as good a solution as you could
obtain, the world doesn't loose a thing if you leave the problem alone. A
corollary of the third rule is that one should never compete with one's
colleagues. If you are pretty sure that in a certain area you will do a better
job than anyone else, please do it in complete devotion, but when in doubt,
abstain."

I will be applying this rules to my future project selection. I hope you do too.

[article1]: http://www.drdobbs.com/architecture-and-design/dijkstras-3-rules-for-project-selection/240161615 "Dr. Dobb's Article"
[article2]: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/EWD/transcriptions/EWD06xx/EWD637.html "Dijkstra's Memo"
